Cryptology
Written By:

    Gustavus J. Simmons 

Cryptology, science concerned with data communication and storage in secure and usually secret form. It encompasses both cryptography and cryptanalysis.

The term cryptology is derived from the Greek kryptós (“hidden”) and lógos (“word”). Security obtains from legitimate users being able to transform information by virtue of a secret key or keys—i.e., information known only to them. The resulting cipher, although generally inscrutable and not forgeable without the secret key, can be decrypted by anyone knowing the key either to recover the hidden information or to authenticate the source. Secrecy, though still an important function in cryptology, is often no longer the main purpose of using a transformation, and the resulting transformation may be only loosely considered a cipher.

Cryptography (from the Greek kryptós and gráphein, “to write”) was originally the study of the principles and techniques by which information could be concealed in ciphers and later revealed by legitimate users employing the secret key. It now encompasses the whole area of key-controlled transformations of information into forms that are either impossible or computationally infeasible for unauthorized persons to duplicate or undo.

Cryptanalysis (from the Greek kryptós and analýein, “to loosen” or “to untie”) is the science (and art) of recovering or forging cryptographically secured information without knowledge of the key. Cryptology is often—and mistakenly—considered a synonym for cryptography and occasionally for cryptanalysis, but specialists in the field have for years adopted the convention that cryptology is the more inclusive term, encompassing both cryptography and cryptanalysis.

Cryptography was initially only concerned with providing secrecy for written messages, especially in times of war. Its principles apply equally well, however, to securing data flowing between computers or data stored in them, to encrypting facsimile and television signals, to verifying the identity of participants in electronic commerce (e-commerce) and providing legally acceptable records of those transactions. Because of this broadened interpretation of cryptography, the field of cryptanalysis has also been enlarged.

This article discusses the basic elements of cryptology, delineating the principal systems and techniques of cryptography as well as the general types and procedures of cryptanalysis. It also provides a concise historical survey of the development of cryptosystems and cryptodevices. A brief introduction is also given to the revolution in cryptology brought on by the information age, e-commerce, and the Internet. For additional information on the encoding and encryption of facsimile and television signals and of computer data, see telecommunications system and information processing.

” Translation serves to extend the communicative value of a text. Sometimes people want to restrict it. Confidential messages require for their efficacy that they be known to and understood by only the single person or the few persons to whom they are…
General considerations

Because much of the terminology of cryptology dates to a time when written messages were the only things being secured, the source information, even if it is an apparently incomprehensible binary stream of 1s and 0s, as in computer output, is referred to as the plaintext. As noted above, the secret information known only to the legitimate users is the key, and the transformation of the plaintext under the control of the key into a cipher (also called ciphertext) is referred to as encryption. The inverse operation, by which a legitimate receiver recovers the concealed information from the cipher using the key, is known as decryption.
The fundamentals of codes, ciphers, and authentication

The most frequently confused, and misused, terms in the lexicon of cryptology are code and cipher. Even experts occasionally employ these terms as though they were synonymous.

A code is simply an unvarying rule for replacing a piece of information (e.g., letter, word, or phrase) with another object, but not necessarily of the same sort; Morse code, which replaces alphanumeric characters with patterns of dots and dashes, is a familiar example. Probably the most widely known code in use today is the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII). Employed in all personal computers and terminals, it represents 128 characters (and operations such as backspace and carriage return) in the form of seven-bit binary numbers—i.e., as a string of seven 1s and 0s. In ASCII a lowercase a is always 1100001, an uppercase A always 1000001, and so on. Acronyms are also widely known and used codes, as, for example, Y2K (for “Year 2000”) and COD (meaning “cash on delivery”). Occasionally such a code word achieves an independent existence (and meaning) while the original equivalent phrase is forgotten or at least no longer has the precise meaning attributed to the code word—e.g., modem (originally standing for “modulator-demodulator”).

Ciphers, as in the case of codes, also replace a piece of information (an element of the plaintext that may consist of a letter, word, or string of symbols) with another object. The difference is that the replacement is made according to a rule defined by a secret key known only to the transmitter and legitimate receiver in the expectation that an outsider, ignorant of the key, will not be able to invert the replacement to decrypt the cipher. In the past, the blurring of the distinction between codes and ciphers was relatively unimportant. In contemporary communications, however, information is frequently both encoded and encrypted so that it is important to understand the difference. A satellite communications link, for example, may encode information in ASCII characters if it is textual, or pulse-code modulate and digitize it in binary-coded decimal (BCD) form if it is an analog signal such as speech. The resulting coded data is then encrypted into ciphers by using the Data Encryption Standard or the Advanced Encryption Standard (DES or AES; described in the section History of cryptology). Finally, the resulting cipher stream itself is encoded again, using error-correcting codes for transmission from the ground station to the orbiting satellite and thence back to another ground station. These operations are then undone, in reverse order, by the intended receiver to recover the original information.

In the simplest possible example of a true cipher, A wishes to send one of two equally likely messages to B, say, to buy or sell a particular stock. The communication must take place over a wireless telephone on which eavesdroppers may listen in. It is vital to A’s and B’s interests that others not be privy to the content of their communication. In order to foil any eavesdroppers, A and B agree in advance as to whether A will actually say what he wishes B to do, or the opposite. Because this decision on their part must be unpredictable, they decide by flipping a coin. If heads comes up, A will say Buy when he wants B to buy and Sell when he wants B to sell. If tails comes up, however, he will say Buy when he wants B to sell, and so forth. (The messages communicate only one bit of information and could therefore be 1 and 0, but the example is clearer using Buy and Sell.)

Grid depicting an encryption/decryption protocol.

With this encryption/decryption protocol being used, an eavesdropper gains no knowledge about the actual (concealed) instruction A has sent to B as a result of listening to their telephone communication. Such a cryptosystem is defined as “perfect.” The key in this simple example is the knowledge (shared by A and B) of whether A is saying what he wishes B to do or the opposite. Encryption is the act by A of either saying what he wants done or not as determined by the key, while decryption is the interpretation by B of what A actually meant, not necessarily of what he said.

This example can be extended to illustrate the second basic function of cryptography, providing a means for B to assure himself that an instruction has actually come from A and that it is unaltered—i.e., a means of authenticating the message. In the example, if the eavesdropper intercepted A’s message to B, he could—even without knowing the prearranged key—cause B to act contrary to A’s intent by passing along to B the opposite of what A sent. Similarly, he could simply impersonate A and tell B to buy or sell without waiting for A to send a message, although he would not know in advance which action B would take as a result. In either event, the eavesdropper would be certain of deceiving B into doing something that A had not requested.

To protect against this sort of deception by outsiders, A and B could use the following encryption/decryption protocol.

Cryptology. [example of an encryption/decryption protocol]

They secretly flip a coin twice to choose one of four equally likely keys, labeled HH, HT, TH, and TT, with both of them knowing which key has been chosen. The outcome of the first coin flip determines the encryption rule just as in the previous example. The two coin flips together determine an authentication bit, 0 or 1, to be appended to the ciphers to form four possible messages: Buy-1, Buy-0, Sell-1, and Sell-0. B will only accept a message as authentic if it occurs in the row corresponding to the secret key. The pair of messages not in that row will be rejected by B as non-authentic. B can easily interpret the cipher in an authentic message to recover A’s instructions using the outcome of the first coin flip as the key. If a third party C impersonates A and sends a message without waiting for A to do so, he will, with probability 1/2, choose a message that does not occur in the row corresponding to the key A and B are using. Hence, the attempted deception will be detected by B, with probability 1/2. If C waits and intercepts a message from A, no matter which message it is, he will be faced with a choice between two equally likely keys that A and B could be using. As in the previous example, the two messages he must choose between convey different instructions to B, but now one of the ciphers has a 1 and the other a 0 appended as the authentication bit, and only one of these will be accepted by B. Consequently, C’s chances of deceiving B into acting contrary to A’s instructions are still 1/2; namely, eavesdropping on A and B’s conversation has not improved C’s chances of deceiving B.

Clearly, in either example, secrecy or secrecy with authentication, the same key cannot be reused. If C learned the message by eavesdropping and observed B’s response, he could deduce the key and thereafter impersonate A with certainty of success. If, however, A and B chose as many random keys as they had messages to exchange, the security of the information would remain the same for all exchanges. When used in this manner, these examples illustrate the vital concept of a onetime key, which is the basis for the only cryptosystems that can be mathematically proved to be cryptosecure. This may seem like a “toy” example, but it illustrates the essential features of cryptography. It is worth remarking that the first example shows how even a child can create ciphers, at a cost of making as many flips of a fair coin as he has bits of information to conceal, that cannot be “broken” by even national cryptologic services with arbitrary computing power—disabusing the lay notion that the unachieved goal of cryptography is to devise a cipher that cannot be broken.
Cryptology in private and commercial life

At the very end of the 20th century, a revolution occurred in the way private citizens and businesses made use of and were dependent on pure information, i.e., information with no meaningful physical embodiment. This was sparked by two technical developments: an almost universal access to affordable real-time global communications, and the practical capability to acquire, process, store, and disseminate virtually unlimited amounts of information. Electronic banking, personal computers, the Internet and associated e-commerce, and “smart” cards were some of the more obvious instances where this revolution affected every aspect of private and commercial life.

To appreciate how this involved cryptology, contrast what is involved when a customer makes a noncash purchase in person with what is involved in a similar transaction in e-commerce. For a direct purchase, the merchant routinely asks for some photo identification, usually a driver’s license, to verify the customer’s identity. Neither party is ordinarily concerned with secrecy; both are vitally concerned with other aspects of information integrity. Next, consider an analogous transaction over the Internet. The merchant must still verify the customer’s identity, even though they may be separated by thousands of miles, and the customer must still be assured that he will only be charged the agreed amount. However, there is a whole gamut of new concerns. The customer must be assured that information he communicates to the merchant is confidential and protected from interception by others. And while the merchant retains the customer’s signature as material proof of a direct transaction, he has only a string of 0s and 1s on a hard disk following an e-commerce transaction. The merchant must be confident that this “information” will suffice for him to collect payment, as well as protect him should the customer later disavow the transaction or claim that it was for a different amount. All of these concerns, and more, have to be met before the simplest e-commerce transactions can be made securely. As a result, cryptology has been extended far beyond its original function of providing secrecy.

The conduct of commerce, affairs of state, military actions, and personal affairs all depend on the existence of generally accepted means of authenticating identity, authority, ownership, license, signature, notarization, date of action, receipt, and so on. In the past these have depended almost entirely on documents, and on protocols for the creation of those documents, for authentication. Society has evolved and adopted a complex set of legal and forensic procedures, depending almost entirely on the physical evidence intrinsic to the documents themselves, to resolve disputes over authenticity. In the information age, however, possession, control, transfer, or access to real assets is frequently based on electronic information, and a license to use, modify, or disseminate valuable information itself is similarly determined. Thus, it is essential that internal evidence be present in the information itself—since that is the only thing available. Modern cryptology, therefore, must provide every function presently served by documents—public and private. In fact, it frequently must do more. When someone mails a document by certified mail with a request for a delivery receipt, the receipt only proves that an envelope was delivered; it says nothing about the contents. Digital certificates of origination and digital receipts, though, are inextricably linked to each electronic document. Many other functions, such as signatures, are also much more demanding in a digital setting. In June 2000 the U.S. Congress gave digital signatures the same legal status as written signatures—the first such legislation in the world.

In classical cryptology the participants trust each other but not outsiders; typical examples include diplomatic communications and military commands. In business and personal transactions, though, the situation is almost the opposite, as the participants may have various motives for cheating. For example, the cheater may wish to impersonate some other participant, to eavesdrop on communications between other participants, or to intercept and modify information being communicated between other users. The cheater may be an insider who wishes to disavow communications he actually originated or to claim to have received messages from other participants who did not send them. He may wish to enlarge his license to gain access to information to which he is not supposed to have access or to alter the license of others. He may wish simply to subvert the system to deny services to others or to cause other users to reject as fraudulent information that is in fact legitimate. Therefore, modern cryptology must also prevent every form of cheating or, failing that, detect cheating in information-based systems where the means for cheating depends only on tampering with electronic information.

At the beginning of the 1990s, most people would likely have been hard-pressed to say where cryptology had an impact on their day-to-day lives. Today, people who have purchased merchandise over the Internet are familiar with warnings that they are about to exchange information over a secure link. When a warning appears alerting consumers that a merchant’s authentication has either expired or is not working, they are aware that this is a warning to proceed at their own risk in providing personal information, such as credit card numbers. Only a few consumers are aware, however, that behind this exchange of authentications is a 128-bit cryptography key that has been in common use around the world for transactions over the Internet since it was approved for export by the U.S. government in 2000, replacing an earlier 40-bit key that had been made insecure by the growing power of computers to test it. The 128-bit key offers “strong encryption” that protects Internet transactions against almost any threat; nevertheless, some Web browsers will support an even stronger 256-bit encryption key, which offers a much stronger level of protection required by many governments for top-secret documents.

Cryptology, indeed, has long been a part of modern daily life. In particular, electronic banking and various financial, medical, and legal databases depend on cryptology for security. One example is the personal identity number (PIN), a coded identification that must be entered into an automated teller machine (ATM) along with a bankcard to corroborate that the card is being used by an authorized bearer. The PIN may be stored in an encrypted form (as a cipher) either in the bank’s computers or on the card itself. The transformation used in this type of cryptography is called one-way; i.e., it is easy to compute a cipher when given the bank’s key and the customer’s PIN, but it is computationally infeasible to compute the plaintext PIN from the cipher even when the key is known. This protects the cardholder from being impersonated by someone who has access to the bank’s computer files. Similarly, communications between the ATM and the bank’s central computer are encrypted to prevent a would-be thief from tapping into the phone lines and recording the signals sent to the ATM to authorize the dispensing of cash in response to a legitimate user request and then later feeding the same signals to the ATM repeatedly to deceive it into dispensing money illegitimately from the customer’s account.

A novel application that involves all aspects of cryptography is the “smart” credit card, which has a microprocessor built into the card itself. The user must corroborate his identity to the card each time a transaction is made, in much the same way that a PIN is used with an ATM. The card and the card reader execute a sequence of encrypted sign/countersign-like exchanges to verify that each is dealing with a legitimate counterpart. Once this has been established, the transaction itself is carried out in encrypted form to prevent anyone, including the cardholder or the merchant whose card reader is involved, from eavesdropping on the exchange and then later impersonating either party to defraud the system. This elaborate protocol is carried out in a way that is invisible to the user, except for the necessity of entering a PIN to initiate the transaction. Smart cards are in widespread use throughout Europe, much more so than the “dumb” plastic cards common in the United States. The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES; see History of cryptology), approved as a secure communications standard by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in 2000, is compatible with implementation in smart cards, unlike its predecessor, the Data Encryption Standard (DES).